#LyX 1.6.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 345
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\author "" 
\author "" 
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Notes from Mahnaz Maddah's Thesis
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Quantitative Analysis of Diffusion MRI
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Region of interest (ROI)-based methods 
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Non-time efficient (require user interaction) 
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

ROI size, shape, number, and location not only affect the measured quantities,
 but also influence the significance of the group analysis.(cite Kanaan 2006)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Voxel-based methods
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Datasets compared voxel-by-voxel.
 Simple but alignment very critical.
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Registering scalar fields like FA does not employ all of the information
 in the data and will not provide the most accurate analysis.
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Advantages: 1.user-independent, 2.
 whole-brain analyses.
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Disadvantages: smoothing for statistical validity reduces resolution, significan
t group differences do not necessarily lie within an anatomical tract.
 Reference to an anatomical atlas is hindered by the low resolution of the
 obtained difference map by the limited resolution of the atlas itself (cite
 Kannaan 2006).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Tract-oriented methods.
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Tract-oriented methods offers advantages over ROI-based since it reveals
 local variations of the fiber integrity which are lost when the quatitative
 parameters are averaged over the entire fiber tract in ROI-based methods.
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Clustering could group trajectories to single 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

anatomical
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 fiber tracts.
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

The principal benefit is that observed differences are due to differences
 in the properties of specific tracts rather than differences in the overall
 anatomy/shape of the individual brains.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Problems with Tract-oriented methods
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Regardless of the nature of tractography methods, whether deterministic
 or probabilistic, the output trajectories often have discontinuities due
 to the presence of noise and image imperfections.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Even with an ideal tractography algorithm and incredibly efficient preprocessing
 of the data to remove noise artifacts, lesions and other brain abnormalities
 may cause discontinuities in the trajectories.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Defining similarity between trajectories is not trivial.
 The similarity between three-dimensional curves (trajectories) is not uniquely
 defined and depends on the application.
 A good strategy is to require the similarity measure to use both spatial
 and shape information from the whole trajectory.
 The point correspondence could be facilitated by the use of landmarks that
 contain most of the information for the shape and location of trajectory.
 Such landmarks can be specified using local extrema
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "deriche1990dcm"

\end_inset

 or minimum description length
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "DavisTMI02"

\end_inset

.
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
An unsupervised algorithm is not guaranteed to produce the clusters of interest
 for a given application (fear of over or under-clustering).
 Mahnaz Maddah in her thesis uses a supervised clustering algorithm in DTI
 data that benefits from anatomical information.
 By such a tract-based analysis, she was able to identify a significant
 drop in FA in the vicinity of the lesion (cite Mahnaz's thesis figure p.31),
 without knowing where the lesion is located a priori (cite all Mahnaz's
 papers and thesis).
 The point correspondence between the trajectories is built using a distance
 map and a Voronoi diagram on the same space.
 The anatomical prior is given by an anatomical atlas or by a Dirichlet
 distribution that controls the impact of the atlas.
 By using an atlas, the correspondence between clusters is different subjects
 is automatically known.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
bibfiles "/home/eg01/Documents/diffusion_review/devel/diffusion"
options "plain"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
